# Apache Spark Data Lake
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In this project, we will build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. We will load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. We will deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.


## Song Dataset 
We will be working with two datasets that reside in S3. 


## **Song Dataset**
Is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. Here is a sample record from the ```data/song_data/A/A/A/TRAAABD128F429CF47.json``` file in the song dataset:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARMJAGH1187FB546F3", "artist_latitude": 35.14968, "artist_longitude": -90.04892, "artist_location": "Memphis, TN", "artist_name": "The Box Tops", "song_id": "SOCIWDW12A8C13D406", "title": "Soul Deep", "duration": 148.03546, "year": 1969}
```

## **Log Dataset**
The log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations. Logs dataset is generated by [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim).

Here is a sample record from the log dataset:
```
{"artist":"N.E.R.D. FEATURING MALICE","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Jayden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Fox","length":288.9922,"level":"free","location":"New Orleans-Metairie, LA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1541033612796.0,"sessionId":184,"song":"Am I High (Feat. Malice)","status":200,"ts":1541121934796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"101"}
```

## Star Schema

#### Fact Table 
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`

```
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
```

#### Dimension Tables
**users**  - users in the app
```
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```
**songs**  - songs in music database
```
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```
**artists**  - artists in music database
```
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
```
**time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
```
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```


## ETL Pipeline
- Firstly, the song metadata files are processed to fill the **songs** and **artists** dimension tables.
- Then the log files are processed  to fill the **users** and **time** dimension tables and **songplays** fact table.
- To populate the **time** dimension the timestamps in the log file entries are parsed to generate hour, day, dayofweek, week, month, year fields.
- While populating the **users** table, if a conflict occurs, the level of the user is updated.
- The fact the dimension tables are written as parquet files into an S3 bucket.


## Deployement

1. Following should be the contents of `dl.cfg`:
    ```
    [AWS_CREDENTIALS]
    AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<YOUR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY>
    AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<YOUR_AWS_SECRET_KEY>
    ```

2. Make sure the AWS EMR cluster is assigned appropriate roles to access AWS S3

3. Run the following command to execute the spark application:
    ```spark-submit --master yarn --deploy-mode client etl.py```

## Project Files
- ```etl.py``` reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3 after being transformed using Apache Spark.

# References
- Udacity project description is used to complete the README.md file
- AWS EMR docs
- PySpark 3.0.1 Documentation