# Project: Building a Cloud Data Warehouse
## Project Overview

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app. 


## Project Description
As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results. 


## Song Dataset 
We will be working with two datasets that reside in S3. 


## **Song Dataset**
Is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. Here is a sample record from the ```data/song_data/A/A/A/TRAAABD128F429CF47.json``` file in the song dataset:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARMJAGH1187FB546F3", "artist_latitude": 35.14968, "artist_longitude": -90.04892, "artist_location": "Memphis, TN", "artist_name": "The Box Tops", "song_id": "SOCIWDW12A8C13D406", "title": "Soul Deep", "duration": 148.03546, "year": 1969}
```

## **Log Dataset**
The log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations. Logs dataset is generated by [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim).

Here is a sample record from the log dataset:
```
{"artist":"N.E.R.D. FEATURING MALICE","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Jayden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Fox","length":288.9922,"level":"free","location":"New Orleans-Metairie, LA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1541033612796.0,"sessionId":184,"song":"Am I High (Feat. Malice)","status":200,"ts":1541121934796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"101"}
```

## Star Schema

#### Fact Table 
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`

```
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
```

#### Dimension Tables
**users**  - users in the app
```
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```
**songs**  - songs in music database
```
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```
**artists**  - artists in music database
```
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
```
**time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
```
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```


## ETL Pipeline
- Firstly, the song metadata files are processed to fill the **songs** and **artists** dimension tables.
- Then the log files are processed  to fill the **users** and **time** dimension tables and **songplays** fact table.
- To populate the **time** dimension the timestamps in the log file entries are parsed to generate hour, day, dayofweek, week, month, year fields.
- While populating the **users** table, if a conflict occurs, the level of the user is updated.


## Project Files
- ```create_table.py``` drops and creates your tables (staging, fact, and dimension tables). You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
- ```etl.py``` loads data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into your analytics tables on Redshift.
- ```sql_queries.py``` contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the files above.


## Create Table Schemas
1. Design schemas for the fact and dimension tables. 

2. Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in `sql_queries.py`

3. Complete the logic in `create_tables.py` to connect to the database and create these tables

4. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3. Note down the AWS Redshift cluster endpoint and IAM role ARN details.

5. Add redshift database and IAM role info to `dwh.cfg` (Please Note: The `dwh.cfg` uploaded to github does not have these details). Following is the syntax for the file:
```
    [CLUSTER]
    HOST=
    DB_NAME=
    DB_USER=
    DB_PASSWORD=
    DB_PORT=  

    [IAM_ROLE]
    ARN= 

    [S3]
    LOG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/log_data'
    LOG_JSONPATH='s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json'
    SONG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/song_data'
```
  
  
Fill the CLUSTER and IAM_ROLE section with your redshift cluster and IAM role details obtained in step 4.

6. Test by running `create_tables.py` and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. The Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console can also be used for this.

## Environment 
- Python 3.6

- PostgresSQL 9.5

- psycopg2 - Python Driver for PostgreSQL database

- Boto3 - To programmatically manage AWS Redshift cluster


## Instructions
- Run ```create_tables.py``` and ```etl.py``` as shown:
> /home/workspace# python create_tables.py  
> /home/workspace# python etl.py

### References:
- Udacity project description is used to compile the ```README.md``` file
- [AWS Redshift Doc](https://aws.amazon.com/redshift/getting-started/?p=rs&bttn=hero&exp=b)